We have three clay courts.
Three here and three more there.
A total of nine clay courts.
We use the part intended
for basketball players to warm up.
And that part over there
is the athletics tartan track.
There is also a completely new
concrete part with a hall behind it.
When we came here none of that existed.
There were only these clay courts.
And everything else is built.
And only for six months.
Everything happens
pretty fast with you?
Having good partners
is the key to my success.
Would you like to come downstairs
so I can show you the tartan track.
It's really great.
I think it's about 36 meters long.
So everyone can use it.
-This micro location is ideal.
A wonderful place to sweat.
Athletes who come here
have a hotel where they can eat,
get ready and come to training.
They have a sea where they can swim,
from March until November.
It's nice. -What more
could you want than that.
Who do you think used the court first?
-Pete Sampras. -You won't guess.
The first two people who played on this
court are Roger Federer's children.
He came here in the summer when
the fields were supposed to be finished.
The first two people to enter
the field were his two sons.
They played here on the courts.
We have one concrete court here, and there
are two more concrete courts up there.
There are balloons on them,
so we can still play.
And behind them is a hall
that is phenomenal.
We have heating in it and
all other conditions. -Congratulations.
Ljubo, good afternoon.
I really thank you for your time.
Long time no see, twenty years
have passed since our last meeting.
It was on the Olympic Games
in Athens in 2004.
It was a lineup. -That's right.
I thank you for being a guest on the show
and for talking about your life.
I'm glad to see you again. -Thank you.
Thanks for the invitation.
I'm always happy to expand
the view of my life to people
who don't know it,
and there are many of them.
Yes, 20 years have passed since Athens
and beautiful sports moments.
We were in the army together.
-We even have evidence for that.
Thanks for the invitation.
I'm glad to see you. After all this time.
Ljubo, before the very beginning
and the conversation about your life.
In the beginning,
you will be our tour guide.
We are located on the island of Lošinj,
where you organized the academy.
All this we see around us
is really impressive.
There are many children
who speak different languages.
Can you tell us a little more about
this project of yours and your goals.
A lot has happened in your life.
Tell us more about all that.
What we have built here and what
we will deal with is a summary
of everything I know and what
I have experienced playing tennis.
From 1992-1993 when I was in Italy
in the club for three or four years.
Which looked something like this.
A place where promising players who want
to become professionals one day gather.
My experience as a player, trainer
and TV commentator, I try everything...
Pass on to the young. -That's right.
This gym we are in now is specific.
There are no weights in it.
We follow modern training methods.
This place is like a fairy tale.
Absolute paradise.
We have best conditions in the world.
Everything we need is here.
We are isolated from the public,
and that is ideal for training,
for focus and concentration.
I'm happy about that.
We did something, and that is that
people come back here again.
We get more and more calls.
But we have limited capacity.
And it happened that we even
started rejecting players,
and that was not our goal.
In terms of infrastructure you are
covered with courts... What's in here?
As for the tennis courts,
we have nine clay courts.
Here in Veli Lošinj, outdoors.
We have four concrete courts.
One of them is with a fixed structure,
it is a closed type.
And on the other three courts,
we have the option to put on
and take off balloons,
depending on the need.
That's what Veli Lošinj is all about.
We also have them in Mali Lošinj,
which we use the most during tournaments.
In June, the European Senior Championship
of all categories is played here.
When 350 players come from
all over the world because it is
an open championship.
Then we use all the courts on the island.
Our infrastructure is truly top-notch.
We lack absolutely nothing.
We have everything.
We have sponsors who send us balls,
rackets and everything we need.
So everything is great.
I'm not saying that because it's mine.
But I am quite demanding.
When I see how much youth,
dreams, thinking, illusions are here,
can you imagine and draw a parallel
with some of your beginnings
at the age of 10 or 11 in Banja Luka.
Compare today's conditions
with how you grew up.
How young people
thing today.
I'm going to sound a little silly now,
but the first thing that comes to mind
are cell phones, iPads, technology
that has changed the way of life.
It is the present, it is modern.
You can't do without it today.
There was a period some ten years ago
when we might have been able
to do something about it.
But, it's too late.
As parents, as a coach, we cannot
tell children not to use cell phones.
We know it's harmful,
we don't know how much.
When we talk about beginning and
what I remember. I remember training.
I ran in the forest, played
basketball, football, handball.
Everything that childhood offered.
Today it is totally different.
Today, we very quickly starts
to engage in professional sports
or at least the idea of ​​professionalism.
For children today sport does not
represent what it represented to us.
Everything is highlights,
everything is short, everything is quick.
There is an overwhelming amount
of information that confuses children
more than it helps them.
These are today's challenges for trainers
and for the people who try to teach
them life, sports, tennis and everything
that is needed for top sport.
And that is the idea of ​​every
child who comes to Lošinj.
Last year the Italian TV company Sky
made a documentary about your life
and for the first time since 1992
you went to your birthplace.
In Lužani near Banja Luka.
For the first time after many years,
the emotions are certainly there.
Can it be described with words?
How did you feel and did you meet
someone from your childhood?
Or is it a story you've long forgotten?
-Yes, I am quite far from all that.
It was emotional. I don't think I can
describe it, because it's hard for me.
In the very beginning, there was
no possibility to return home.
Then there was a period when you
didn't want it and then there was
a period when you
no longer have time.
And so 30 years pass. -That is the reason
why I was not in Banja Luka.
Now we decided to make that
documentary which is beautiful
and I am really very satisfied.
It was recorded in two parts,
twice for 40 minutes.
The first part talks about childhood
and beginnings, and the second part
talks about tennis from 1999
until the end of his career.
Excuse me, will we be able to watch
that here? With subtitles.
If anyone is interested.
I am not the owner of the rights,
but if anyone is interested,
please contact Sky Television.
I want to say it was emotional, but not
in the way that I was angry, sad, happy.
But just a strong emotion.
It's like I unblocked some part
that I didn't know was blocked.
I cried all day.
There were tears and emotions, as if
my whole life had passed before my eyes.
Suddenly, and I rarely do that,
I started thinking about my life journey,
not only about Banja Luka,
but about my whole life journey.
I'm just not that kind of guy,
I only think about today
and maybe a little ahead,
never about the past.
In the beginning it was some kind
of defense system
so that you don't think about it.
I dreamed about my childhood
for a very long time, but not anymore.
Until five or ten years ago,
I dreamed about my school friends
from Banja Luka and
about my life there.
It is something that is drawn
and engraved in the memory.
Even today I am in contact
with some of them.
And now during this trip
I met my first coach.
Not much has changed there.
It was beautiful.
I didn't even know I needed that.
I'm glad that happened.
Not because of the
negative connotations.
Thirty something years have passed
and I was just glad to see some people.
I came to the place
where it all actually began.
What I didn't know was
that the club I played in, Mladost,
was founded one year before
I started playing tennis.
I thought that club existed
for a long time, that it had a tradition.
And actually it was a new club.
A really beautiful club in the park.
Where the ATP tournament
was held last year. It was nice for me.
Emotional, but beautiful. -Was it
emotionally draining or drawing a line?
Or both? -It was more a discharge.
I don't like to draw lines.
I didn't say I'd never come back.
Better to say discharge.
I haven't used that word
in a long time,
so I'll steal it from you
next time I'm asked.
Let's go back to the beginning.
Did you play any other sports
like football, basketball?
Or was it just tennis
from the beginning?
I started playing tennis relatively late
when I was 8 and a half or 9 years old.
Which is quite late for tennis.
Today, it is suggested that children
start practicing at the age of three,
four, five or six at the most,
and that is because of coordination.
Not because of physical fitness,
but because of the coordination
to hold something in the hand
and to hit the ball.
They explained to me
that it develops at that age.
But considering that I grew up
with a ball that I threw, kicked,
passed, that period passed quickly.
It was not difficult for me
to hit the ball with the racket.
I remember that before
I even started training tennis,
I had plastic rackets and
a sponge ball that I used to hit.
I was an active child
who did all kinds of sports.
When I came home from school,
I would leave my bag in the room
and go outside to play.
And I would come in the evening.
That's what our
childhood looked like.
I started playing tennis
by watching Wimbledon on TV.
When my father asked me which sport
I would like to do more seriously.
While I was watching Wimbledon
I told him it was tennis.
Father didn't even know
if there was a club...
He had no contact with tennis?
-Nothing at all.
He asked his friends.
There used to be two tennis clubs.
I don't know if they still exist.
Petar Drapšin and Mladen Stojanović.
I decided on Mladost, I don't
know why, but that's how it started.
During that younger period
until 1992 by the time he left,
you had notable results
in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Is that true?
-Somewhere near the end.
Not at the beginning,
because if I started playing
in 1988 or 1989,
it wasn't until 1991.
At the age of 12 I was among
the best in Bosnia.
I went to Belgrade to participate
in the first international tournament.
Where I beat some players
who on paper were better than me.
Those were the first signs
that I had talent,
because I only started playing
three or four years ago.
Did you already have any contacts
with clubs then? -No.
If there was no war, I would still be
living in Banja Luka
and who knows what I would do.
There was no such thing.
All this that happened later,
I guess we will talk
about that period as well,
it simply followed each other.
In the beginning, there were
no big plans or ideas.
I simply started doing sports,
I loved it and I was successful.
Now we will move on to more
difficult topics,
because the show is called
Champion's Failure
so we're looking for some…
There are many more failures.
-We come to the sad part.
During that war period in 1992,
I got a little information
about the way you left
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Tell us more about that journey
and how it all unfolded.
And what is it that made
you continue to play sports?
Because of everything that happened,
it was unlikely that you would
continue playing sports, especially
tennis, which is quite demanding.
Yes. Banja Luka was completely sealed
off, with barricades all around.
We lived on the outskirts
of Banja Luka, and at one point,
we weren't even able to enter it,
meaning I couldn't train anymore.
My parents never talked about this,
and they probably never will,
but at one point, they decided
it was safer and better for us to leave
because it became unsafe. You'll
have to ask my father for the details.
As a kid, I didn't understand anything.
However, I felt the tension,
and I felt the fear.
We will leave it at that...
The only way to leave Banja Luka
was with Caritas, by the humanitarian
aircraft that flew from Banja Luka
to Belgrade. I was on that aircraft
with my late mother and my brother.
The other men obviously couldn't join
us. -They couldn't leave the country.
They couldn't leave the country or show
up anywhere. We flew to Belgrade,
and from there, we took a bus
through Hungary and Slovenia to get
to a refugee center in Opatija. We were
there for 6 months. That was the summer,
from May to autumn of 1992. -How old
were you at the time? -I was 13.
The only message
my father left us was:
"Try to make sure Ivan
keeps playing tennis."
That meant by any means possible.
We literally just had plastic bags
and a backpack, and I had rackets
over my shoulders when we left.
We planned to come back,
just like any struggling refugee.
You think everything will
pass soon and you can return,
but as often the case is, you never do.
-You did come back last year.
Yes. I meant it differently. Anyway,
in Opatija, I went to the tennis club
"Opatija" and told everyone: "Listen,
I can play tennis. I have no money,
but if you need a fourth player for
pairs or something of the sort,
count me in.
I'm here if you need me."
That's how I continued
playing that summer.
There was a boy from Vukovar
in the same position as me,
and we'd get to play when the courts
weren't occupied. We'd play for a bit,
which was all for that summer.
In the end, we were kicked out
of the refugee center because
there was no more space for refugees,
just for the internally
displaced persons.
I assume you know the difference
between these two things.
We had to find accommodation
using the little money we had.
This was when we realized
the situation was unsustainale,
and we agreed with a Serbian family
to exchange properties.
Our house, land, and everything
we had back in Banja Luka were
traded for a small apartment in Rijeka.
That's how I ended up in Rijeka.
It was a small two-bedroom apartment,
but it was enough for us to be able
to live and survive. Then, in November
of that year, my father managed
to escape with Caritas,
and our family finally reunited.
We didn't know what was happening
with him prior to this.
How long was your dad gone? -Around
seven months. But we didn't have phones.
Was it possible for you to
focus on the sport at the time?
Were you unsure of everything?
-No, the focus wasn't on the sport.
The focus was on living day by day.
-Focused on surviving. -Yes.
In September, I went back to school
in Opatija for a few weeks,
and that was one of the more traumatic
periods. There was a lot of bullying,
and the kids sadly didn't have
any empathy for refugees and
internally displaced persons. It was
very ugly. But it got a lot better
when I moved to Rijeka,
where I would later meet my wife.
However, my father got out,
and I got a call from Italy
at the beginning of 1993.
I went to Italy, and as they say,
the rest is history.
That's my connection to Rijeka, Croatia,
and that way of life. But looking back,
I always say I feel sorry
for my parents, my grandparents,
and everyone who understood
what was happening then.
As children, we had no clue
what was really going on.
I can't talk to you about
"My traumas..." and so forth...
You're probably carrying it,
but back then, you didn't understand.
You don't know it, and honestly, it's
best you don't know certain things.
You keep moving forward.
-Life goes on.
You climb the steps of life.
You don't even think about it.
But I feel the saddest
for my grandparents.
My grandmother, for example,
passed away in St Louis.
Do I need to say anything more?
That's the saddest part.
A person who grew up in Bosnia,
who didn't leave it all her life,
passes away in St Louis, and her
cemetery is the way it is there.
That's the saddest part. As kids, we'll
figure it out, all young people do,
and that's the least of our problems. I
have always felt sorry for older people.
What kept you going during
your years as a refugee in Rijeka?
What did you, Ivan Ljubičić,
tell yourself to make it through?
Tennis and sports. Tennis is the thing
that... -That gave you something...
It gave you the chance to think about
tomorrow, and not about yesterday.
And I've met a lot of people who,
to this day, think about the 90s
and listen to the music of that time,
they're stuck there.
They never managed to say,
"Okay, let's move on."
I somehow managed to move on, maybe
because my life was taking me there,
maybe it's the way my character is.
I was never looking back.
I still like to listen to that old music
and remember moments from the past,
but I live in the present and think
about tomorrow. That's my lifestyle.
Back then, it was all about thinking of
the next tournament, training session,
and the next step. You were always
thinking about how to be better
and stronger. I was absolutely aware
that I was my family's only hope.
From a very early age, I became
aware of the pressure and opportunities
that tennis could bring.
Even today, when my parents say,
"Don't put pressure on your kids,"
listen, you should put pressure.
Being number 1
in the world is not easy,
but being in the top 10 in the world
in anything is not easy.
If you can't handle pressure, it's
better to go and do something else.
Let's move on to 1999,
my apologies 1996.
That's the beginning of your
professional career. -Correct.
That's when the world found out
about you. The junior Wimbledon.
Describe these beginnings to us.
I'm told there were issues with the
uniforms in one of the key matches.
-Yes, a lot was going on.
In that year everything happened so
quickly. There were signs during 1995.
Ivo Karlović and I won
the European indoors championship,
we became European champions,
which was a big surprise.
We were not the favorites to win.
However, Ivo Karlović was known
for his serve, and I was known for mine.
We surprised those kids there.
We managed to win the championship,
which was a big shock.
It was the first time
people even considered
that we could start playing seriously.
Then, in 1996, when I was 17, I started
playing junior tournaments in Italy.
I won a match, I won two matches, I won
Firenze, Salsomaggiore, Santa Croce...
Things started happening, and I won
a tournament in Prat near Firenze,
which also came as a surprise.
Everything was happening in a span
of 3 months, but it was happening so
quickly that I didn't get a chance
to sit down and process it all.
I went from a player who plays junior
tournaments to a Wimbledon player
within 2 months. It was a shock
for me, and everyone around me.
Suddenly, sponsors and managers showed
up. Everything just exploded all at once
and my life completely changed.
The Wimbledon match in 1996,
which Sky acquired the rights to
broadcast, I let my son watch in.
It was also my first time seeing it,
and it was fascinating.
There was that uniform. I had a
headscarf, and I also had hair.
That's what I wanted to ask you about...
If you had hair back then...
Yes, I had a lot of hair. I was starting
to lose it though... I was bald at 21.
So those were the last attempts at
having something on my head.
It seemed like grass would be
your preferred surface in those
starting years but in the end...
-I have one title. I accidentally
stole it from somewhere...
-So, all of your awards were stolen.
The grass is horrible. Yes, in the
beginning it was my absolute favorite.
Juniors Wimbledon finale was played
on it. However, I can't play on grass.
In the end I won Wimbledon
as a coach, but as a player...
I won one tournament on grass,
but I don't know how it happened.
Grass just did not mesh well with me,
to this day I still don't know why.
But by all the metrics it should.
-Yes, but the ball slips and you can't
do anything about it. My serve is
less "deadly" on the grass compared to
other surfaces which I don't know why,
to this day and with all my knowledge
of tennis I still don't know why.
I couldn't find my footing on the grass.
As a junior it worked for me,
and as a coach as well, but as a
professional it didn't suit me at all.
1996 was a turning point. Up until then
you were a half-professional player...
Yes. -...you didn't have any resources.
But then it started becoming serious.
Who were the people, or rather who was
the man, who put you on the right path?
Is this when professional
management came about? -Yes.
Was there a serious coach,
or was it still...
I signed my first professional
sponsorship in 1996 with Adidas,
a great contract even by today's
standards. I suppose they saw
the next Ivanišević in me, or something
like that. That helped me a lot.
In 1997, I got a call from Riccardo
Piatti asking me to work with him.
All of that happened within those
6 to 9 months, and that was the solution
to my entire career. Riccardo Piatti was
with me throughout my entire career.
He didn't charge me for the coaching
at first. He told me I could pay him
once I had the money,
which was what ended up happening.
My manager at the time wasn't
the one who handled my career.
He handled the contracts
and the sponsors,
but Riccardo Piatti was the one who
took care of my career starting in 1997.
That was the beginning
of my professional career.
Later, it took me 2 years
to figure out how Riccardo operated,
his way of work,
thinking, and playing style.
I had to change my style of playing.
Until 1997, I was a serve-and-volley,
serve-and-net player, and I was doing
drop shots and rhythm-breaking tactics.
But on my first day with Riccardo,
he told me: "Look, what you're doing
is nice and all, but that isn't the
future of tennis. Let's work on getting
the ball over the net 700 times
without making a mistake."
This was a huge change for me. It took
me 2 years to get accustomed to it all
and for things to settle - what I knew
previously and what he wanted from me.
In 1999, I managed to crack it.
And in 2001, it all came together,
and it was your first serious title.
I assume it was also the first time
you earned serious money.
It happened in Lyon. -Yes.
-You got in with the elites.
Was this the moment
when you realized you've made it?
First, it was the junior tournament
in 1996, and in 2001, it was the first
serious tournament, the first serious
money. Is that when it all came together
and settled into place? -Well, 1999
was the year I made it to the top 100.
In tennis, when you make it to the
top 100, it means you're participating
in the main Grand Slam tournaments,
where the money is... Well, back then,
the amount of money wasn't what it is
today. The prize money skyrocketed.
It meant that you were a part of the
elites. That's when you start making
the real money. The 2001 Lyon title
was an important step in my career.
I wouldn't say it was a turning point,
but I did feel a weight drop from my
shoulders once I got the title,
so I can continue evolving.
I wouldn't win a title until 2005, but
overall, the 2001 title was lovely one.
In 2001, I remember before the finals,
against Younes El Aynaoui,
I was in the locker room,
and I had a cellphone with me.
That was around the time
mobile phones became popular,
and I was talking to my father about
the pressure and he bluntly told me:
"We have been working on this your whole
life, so do with that what you will."
No pressure at all.
-No pressure at all.
The point is, I played one of
the best matches in my career 6-3 6-2.
I was truly in the zone and I spent
a lot of years afterward trying to
get back to that feeling, not even
the score but the zone I was in
during that match and I couldn't
for a very long time.
I was in a trans back then.
-And what about the negative side?
Given that the show is called
Champion's Failure.
One of the harder losses was in
Australia in 2002. -Do I have to?
Do I have to go there? -I don't know if
it was... Let's clarify it a bit.
But really when I was looking at it 2-0
and then 5-2. How did it happen? How?
Well, it's stupid to say it now, I did
lose matches where I had the match ball.
Because when you're a player it can just
happen. That match was the hardest match
of my career, mentally and physically,
and by all measures, that match will
go into, well I mean it already is,
in the book of my darkest moments.
I'll try to explain what I remember,
and how we got to that point.
It was the 3rd round, and it was natural
for me to be there, given my ranking.
I was among the first 50 players.
I was playing against Wayne Ferreira,
who was an experienced player. I
remember my coach always telling me
I must look out for him
because he was winning big time,
he was a big player, and all that.
In the first set, I won by 6-4.
I always remember the feeling
and that feeling was:
"I won the set,
but I don't think I deserved to."
The second set was 6-4. I'm thinking
to myself, I'm leading 2-0 in sets.
I'm not at all the better player,
but okay, whatever.
His morale kind of starts going down.
The score was 5-1 or maybe even 5-2.
But by the middle of the 3rd set
I started cramping up.
There are various types of cramps, the
ones with which you can keep playing
and those with which you can't.
I think these were in my calves.
The score was 5-3, 40-15,
two match balls for me.
We were practically there,
but I couldn't serve.
The cramps were maybe even
in my abdominal muscles,
which are the absolute worst kind,
because you really can't do anything.
5-4. 5-5, I lose the third set,
as well as the fourth.
It's the middle of the day,
the heat is unbearable.
The sun sets, the weather gets
a little better, but I'm losing
in the 5th set break, 3-2, 4-2, 5-2
he leads in the fifth set.
When everyone thought it was over,
I somehow find new strength.
There's no more sun, it's cooler.
5-3, 5-4, 5-5.
I'm coming back in the 5th set.
At 5-5, I hit the ball
and the blister I had bursts.
I literally can't
hold the racket anymore.
I call the physiotherapist.
Everyone who has played tennis
and had blisters knows
that you can bandage
all blisters on your hand,
except on the palm. If it's on
the palm, no one can help you.
You either bandage the entire palm,
but then you lose the feeling.
That’s how it was.
In the end, I lost 7-5.
That will forever remain
the most painful loss because,
if I remember correctly,
in the fourth round
I was supposed to play against
Albert Costa, who was a great player.
But on that fast surface... I think
Ferreira played the semifinals that year.
It wasn’t just a big loss,
but also a missed big opportunity.
I won’t exaggerate if I say
that my career was not decided,
but definitely took a certain
direction after that match.
Maybe things could have been
better if I had won that match.
How did you recover and get
back on the winning path?
I didn’t for a while, because
it was in 2002, 2003, and 2004.
I didn’t win anything. Until the 2004
Olympics when we last saw each other.
That year was... The medal...
That's when you made your
comeback. -I came back.
I started to believe again
that there was something in me
strong enough that I could
rise above mediocrity.
Let’s be clear, I was ranked
between 25th and 45th.
For me, that was average.
I wanted more.
I’d be lying if I said that match
didn’t... Slow me down.
It shook my confidence.
Until 2004, when the medal
brought me back.
I got my wings back again.
At the end of that year, I got married.
That gave me a lot of personal
security... -Calmness.
Then 2005 and 2006 were absolute
tennis rhapsody years in my career.
We’ll forget the sad period.
Let’s start from Athens 2004.
Our famous celebration. Then we go
to 2010, when there was perfection
in terms of winning tournaments,
the national team, Davis Cup,
Olympic bronze. A perfect streak.
How much did that bronze help?
That was the foundation
for understanding where you were.
The bronze was the foundation
of all later successes.
Not just because it was
an Olympic bronze,
of course, that’s important,
but also the matches we won
and the way we won them.
We beat great teams.
Mario Ančić and I defeated
all the best doubles pairs in
the world at that tournament.
That helped us in 2005
when we won the Davis Cup.
We beat the Bryan brothers,
the greatest players of all time.
Athens is the foundation of all my
successes that followed.
You know yourself that
the atmosphere was phenomenal.
We had a great time.
The Olympic village is hard to explain
to someone who hasn’t been there.
The cheering, the other sports.
We go to your games,
you come to our matches.
It was wonderful. Sydney 2000
was a bit of a tourist trip.
Your first Olympics, you're a bit lost.
At the second one, you go all the way.
That’s what I needed for
everything that happened after.
And the cherry
on top after that.
After the bronze,
came that famous trophy.
Davis Cup 2005. We played
in the final against Slovakia.
For the first time
in tennis history, two teams
that weren’t seeded
made it to the Davis Cup final.
We beat the Americans in
a match that’s still talked about today.
Roddick, Agassi,
the Bryan brothers.
Two matches in Split
against Romania and Russia.
Every time I mention
Split 2005, I get chills.
The atmosphere was unreal. Whoever
showed up, we would have beaten them.
In Split, no one had a chance.
And the final against
Slovakia in Bratislava.
After the first day,
we were leading 2-1.
That Sunday I woke up...
-Your neck was stiff.
I played on tablets,
with a painkiller injection.
In the end, I lost,
but Mario won.
The reception in
Zagreb was phenomenal.
They say there were
70, 80 thousand people.
I remember the bus ride
from the airport to the square.
I thought no one would
show up for the reception.
That’s every athlete’s fear.
-I thought the same.
But, when you arrive
and see the people...
You realize what
you’ve done. -Exactly.
Especially you, who are 250-300
days abroad and traveling.
It is important for the national team
to feel that... -Yes.
Calling all people and fans.
When the reception is made, come.
It means a lot to athletes. All
of us athletes are in tunnels,
in rooms, lonely. It is not a
luxurious life as people think.
When something like that happens,
when we "die" for the national team
and when it is celebrated,
let it be celebrated.
It gives you the purpose in life.
We need to let people know
that we appreciate them,
we watch them on TV,
on iPads, iPhones,
but when we have the opportunity
to show respect for athletes,
then do it right. That is very
important. -Nicely said, I agree.
Year 2006, Roland Garros,
semi-finals, right? -That's right.
Where are we there?
-We are at the top.
I am the third player in the world,
I've never been better,
I'm playing the best
tennis of my life.
But, at Roland Garros
against Nadal.
There can be a period
at the end of that sentence.
That was the maximum. There was
no room to step forward? -No.
Maybe there was space in 2006 in
Australia, at the beginning of the year.
Back up a bit. We win the Davis
Cup in 2005, I go to India without
training, I win the tournament,
I beat Carlos S. in the final,
I come to Melbourne as one of
the favorites to win the tournament.
I'm ranked 5-6, but everyone
is already making predictions.
I am among the best in terms
of form and what I can do.
I easily win all matches.
In the quarter finals I lost to
Marcos Baghdatis. The match I
was losing 2-0, I came back to 2-2,
I had a chance in the
fifth set and I didn't take it.
If we are talking about winning
the Grand Slam,
it was Australia,
not Roland Garros.
Despite being in the
semifinals of Roland Garros,
against Nadal on clay,
I had two set points
in the third set, but objectively...
I would just postpone inevitable.
The only thing I didn't play at the end
of my career was the Grand Slam final
or did I win it. -And in 2010,
you won the Masters as the oldest.
At what age? -Now these young people
are pushing those boundaries.
It was a big surprise then.
-All of those who played then...
Roger slipped away, but I
beat Đoković, Nadal, Roddick...
Everybody in that tournament.
-Everybody. Everything matched.
What happened then? Then you
probably said that's it. -I did.
That was the beginning
of the end. -In your head?
The beginning
of the end in the head.
In 2011, I was already thinking
about the end of my career.
Roger friendly persuaded
me to play one more year.
That was the culmination.
-Why? -Why did I stop playing?
Why did you stop relatively early?
Were there any health problems?
Or psyche? -I had problems,
and still have them, with ankles.
They told me that they couldn't
help the cartilage in my ankle.
A few injections helped,
but that's not a solution.
I realized that the best tennis
is behind me, not in front of me.
A second child was born.
Zara joined us.
Traveling with two small
children is not very easy.
Everything somehow
came together in one pile.
I remember like it was
yesterday, I was in Dubai.
I finished the tournament.
Aida was there with the children.
It was agreed that I would
go to the USA for a month.
We will not take children. I'd fly to
Indian Wells, and they'd fly home.
We will stay a few more
days in Dubai, then we will fly.
The day before the flight,
I woke up at four in the morning
and realized that it was over.
My career is over.
Aida is always on the right side.
I wake her up. - That's it.
She looks at me, I say it's over.
She understood immediately,
she didn't even try to
persuade me. Let's talk, no.
We woke up, drank coffee,
waited for the children to wake up.
We get it, it's over.
How to tell the coach,
when to tell the coach?
That day we have two more
training sessions, and plan.
We agreed that we would
invite everyone to dinner,
and tell the coach and conditioning
coach that this was the decision.
It was the longest day of my life.
I stopped playing in my head, but
I had to do two training sessions.
I remember Ricardo telling
me when we remembered,
he spoke to the conditioning
coach and said I was absent.
Something is wrong,
we need to animate him.
The second training session
was even worse.
At dinner they understood
what it was about.
We decided to play another
match in Monte Carlo.
If I could go back now,
I probably wouldn't play it.
As my professional career
began in Monte Carlo,
In 1999, I wanted to close the
whole circle, to make it the last match.
That was... -2012.
-Against Ivan Dodig. -Dodig, yes.
It's been 12 years.
To sum it all up.
We mentioned several situations.
Is there anything you regret?
I don't believe it, but...
If you could, but you didn't?
Now you mentioned
about the quarterfinals.
Can you believe that no one
asked me that before?
Do I regret anything?
I would like to play that
quarter-final against Baghdatis again.
Only the fifth set? -Both the first
and the second. The ones I lost.
I might want to play
with Ferreira again.
Those are two defeats
that were difficult.
In the end, that's life.
You learn from negative experiences.
Kids do not understand
negative experiences.
They are absolutely necessary
to achieve something.
We build ourselves up more through
defeats than through victories.
Victories are quickly forgotten.
Titles count.
Defeats make us stronger
and we learn from defeats.
Tennis is a specific individual sport.
If you are successful,
you play for 200-300 days in a year.
You don't even know
the name of your home.
Tell me a little about
hanging out at tournaments.
Do sincere friendships
exist among tennis players?
My theory. About Nadal,
Đoković and Federer.
No one counts the Grand Slams,
nothing matters to anyone.
In fact, everything is important to
everyone. Everyone wants to be the best.
Is it the same in that
personal friendship?
Is there sincerity or
is it classic interest?
A tennis player travels
42, 43, 45 weeks a year.
In those weeks, you see
mostly the same people.
You spend more time with your
opponents than with your family.
That's a fact.
In the end, it is clear that
there are true friendships.
It's hard to play against friends.
It's not simple.
There are also those you
don't want to see. It's so natural.
If we talk about this trio,
Federer and Nadal are...
In fact, everything starts with respect.
Novak recently spoke about that.
They respect each other very much.
They understand themselves.
Only they can understand
what they are going through.
We, mere mortals, cannot
understand what it means to win
20 Grand Slam titles and
what they have to go through.
They respect each other
and understand each other.
On a personal level, perhaps
one fits more than the other.
I know that Roger and
Rafa went to dinners.
They don't have a problem.
We come to that over time,
not from the first day.
It is a relationship
that develops over time.
I also went to dinners
with other tennis players.
I played against them
the next day.
We are professionals and
we play for titles, for records.
The most normal thing is
that there is rivalry, which does
not necessarily mean that
it is rivalry in personal life.
Ljubo, different sports are valued
differently in terms of money.
There are different
funds for player rewards.
Do you think maybe tennis
is the most brutal in that?
When you are at the tournament,
everything is paid for and organized.
The moment you lose,
you lose everything. -Yes.
You no longer have any fees.
They literally kick your ass.
That's true, but it's
an individual sport.
All that individual sport
brings, good and bad.
I know a lot of football players...
In football, even if you lose,
you get your monthly salary.
Yes, it's like that in every
team sport, however,
many football players have told me:
"I wish I had played tennis."
Why? Because football players
only see the beautiful side of tennis.
You choose a coach, play in the
tournaments you want,
sleep in the hotel you want...
It's all nice, but the fact is that
at the end of the day,
if you lose you win...
If you win, you get something.
You constantly, every day,
every week actually,
you earn money or not,
if we talk about the economic
and the sports part.
You go to the tournament, and
you don't worry about anything.
We called travel agencies
when we needed a plane ticket.
If we were asked about the return
date, we would answer: "I don't know".
It's hard to explain when
you want to book a hotel.
Listen, I'd like a reservation for
ten days, and maybe I'll stay for two.
How will we know?
We won't know.
And the fact is that
at a higher level,
the organizer pays the player
for one room and a prize fund.
Does not pay travel expenses,
he does not pay for
another room and of course
food is provided in the club.
If you want to eat out it
will be at your own expense.
So the expenses of tennis
players and their teams are huge.
However, the fact is that the prize
fund has been significantly increased.
Just when I stopped playing.
But I must brag that I am somewhat
responsible for that,
because I was politically active
during my career
and a representative of the players.
At the tournaments, we worked
a lot to increase the prize funds.
I'm glad to see that at least
this generation after me
enjoys it a little.
-Well done, Ljubo.
2012. is the year
in which you ended
an active career
and started another. -Yes.
When did you start
thinking about that?
Knowing you, I would
never have thought
that you would go to
the "other side" so quickly.
For the last three years
of my playing career, I contacted
a company that prepares athletes
for the end of their careers.
That is very important.
I told all theathletes I talked to:
"Prepare for the end of your career."
So, the end cannot
just happen to you.
It's like going
somewhere unprepared.
You have to be prepared for that.
Personally, I was afraid of my
private life, because I saw
a lot of athletes who got
divorced, bankrupt...
I was really scared.
But I was lucky
to meet that expert
from Switzerland
who prepared me for it.
Without going into details,
I will only say
that he prepared me
mentally and financially.
He actually explained
to me what the life
of an athlete looks like
when his career is over.
He helped me a lot.
My first job after my
career was on television.
On Italian Sky TV.
This is the first thing that
happened to me in 2012.
They contacted me because they
wanted me to come
and commentate on tennis.
I was very glad,
because even today,
whenever I have a time,
I commentate for Sky.
It's a pleasure to do it, indeed,
because I like the way
the Italians do it.
And the opportunity to be a coach
appeared with the arrival
of Miloš Raonić in 2013.
His manager, who was also my
manager, contacted me and asked:
"Ljubo, would you like
to try yourself as a coach?"
They were big competition for me,
Paul Annacon
former coach of Sampras
and Federer  and Brad Gilbert
who was Agassi’s coach
and now coaching Coco Gauf.
The three of us were in competition
and he had to choose one of us.
I went to Rome, exactly one year ago,
now should be the anniversary...
I spoke with Miloš there and
told him my vision of his tennis,
how he should play and
what I think needs to be improved.
He said to me: "Thank you,
I'll get back to you."
I returned home to Monte Carlo.
A week and two passed
and he didn't get back to me.
and then he called me and asked:
"Can you come with me to Roland Garros,
on some sort of trial
period until Wimbledon?"
I replied that I could.
However, doing a trial period
in the middle of the season is horrible.
You don't really have time
or space to work on anything.
You are there with the player,
but you can't tell him:
"Let's try to change the shot,"
because you don't have time for that.
I think he played the
third round of Roland Garros,
the first round of Halle,
first round of Eastbourne
at Wimbledon
he lost in the second round.
I thought, well that's not it.
After these results, there is no
chance that he will choose me.
However, we agreed to discuss
everything after Wimbledon.
After Wimbledon I told him:
"Miloš, I don't know
what you're thinking about
and what your plans are,
but I'll just tell you
that if you want me to stay,
I want my fitness coach, I want you
to play the tournaments I choose
and I'd like to spend every week
with you, until the end of the year."
He said he agreed. That's how
our cooperation began.
All credit to him for believing in me
regardless of the results.
He believed in the vision,
in my commitment and
in the fact that I dedicated almost
every moment of my life to him.
In the end it really paid off.
He placed in the top ten players that
year, and during the next two years
he climbed the rankings and reached the
position of the third player in the world.
It was actually a base,
a start, some guarantee for Roger,
who saw that I knew my job.
Despite being a former tennis player,
it didn't mean that
I also knew the coaching job.
Roger told me later and openly:
"I followed you and thought about you,
but I wanted to see
if you were good as a coach.
When I saw what you
accomplished with Raonić
and when you were free,
I decided to contact you."
Well done, you just
answered my next question.
So this was an assist?
How did the collaboration between
you and Federer come about?
Tell us a little more
about that relationship.
We were quite close
on a personal level,
we were friends, family friends.
He used to call me sometimes
and ask for some advice,
for some tactics against Đoković,
against Nadal,
even when we weren't work together.
He also knew, as much as I know
about tennis and his game.
I think I stopped working with
Miloš in October of 2015.
and then I made an agreement
with Sky Italia to come
to the Masters at the end of the year
and commentate on the matches.
I was in constant contact
with Roger and when he heard
that I was coming to London,
he said: "Let's meet one evening,
and go to dinner,
you, me, Aida and Mirka.
I thought it would be
a dinner like any other.
At the end of that dinner
he surprised me when he said:
"Would you be interested in
working with me?"
It was an absolute
shock for me,
but oneof the most beautiful
moments in my life.
It was a huge honor for me.
Of course I immediately agreed,
although we didn't talk about money at all.
That was unquestionable for me.
I told him how I thought
he should play.
My goal is that he must
win the Grand Slam.
I even said at that moment
that he must win more than one.
And so it all started.
It was hard at first,
because he soon got injured.
The first problem
was with the knee.
That 2016 was awkward,
buteverything got better after that,
so that collaboration
was very, very successful.
That experience with him is special,
because no matter that
I both played and choached,
that level of professionalism
and everything related to him
is unimaginable.
What's the difference
between him and the rest of us?
There is not half an hour in his
day that is not planned.
That is six or nine
months in advance.
So, everything must be
planned in detail.
You can't tell him: "Come on, I guess
you have time for one dinner?"
He doesn’t have time.
Six months in advance?
-And more.
Everything can be planned even
nine or 12 months in advance.
If a sponsor needs
half a day of his time,
then it must be planned
a year in advance.
He is such a professional
who will respect everything.
"I don't feel like it today",
it does not exist with him.
And what is he like when he trains?
-He’s an animal.
People think that
everything is easy for him.
It's easy for him, because he
brought everything to perfection.
We had training sessions
that lasted 7-8 hours at a time.
We did preparations
and training on fields
far away from the tournament venue,
far from everyone's eyes.
We were constantly
looking for special conditions,
isolated places,
where no one could see us,
because he didn't like to show
what he was doing,
how much he was doing and how.
And then we would show up
at the tournament and train
for about half an hour,
so everyone thought that was all,
while we had training sessions
that literally lasted 7-8 hours.
I was literally exhausted, because
I stood by him the whole time.
Not to mention what
he was going through.
But he wouldn't have
succeeded without it.
And your relationship, which
had to turn from a friendly one
into a business one,
a coach-player relationship,
how did that work?
What was it like on
an individual basis? -Relaxed.
At no point were
there any tensions.
There were a couple of situations
where I had to be a little tougher on him.
Sometimes I felt that it should be
"tightened" a bit, because it loses focus,
bring him to his senses,
to clarify his priorities,
which he may have forgotten
at some point.
But there were
few such situations.
In principle, you were on
the same level energetically? -Yes.
I didn't tell him what to do.
-That was the direction?
It was a dialogue.
We would watch a match together,
and then we would discuss what we saw.
What he sees, what I see,
after which we come
to a conclusion together.
The conversation is not
reduced to my or his monologue,
because we basically
lived together.
We sleep in the same apartment
and literally spend 24 hours together.
It's just easier that way, because
we exchange life and tennis experiences,
because at that level, that's
the only way it can work.
Ljubo, what was your worst
failure in your coaching career?
Wimbledon Finals 2019.
Even today, I still don't understand
what happened there
and how it was even possible.
Not because you
can't lose a match,
not because you can't lose a match
because of match points.
What did it look like?
There were two match points.
Yes, but people keep talking
about those match points,
but what I can say from
my position as a coach,
and I know some will certainly
disagree with me,
but Roger was better for five sets.
If we now look at tennis, he was
the one who dictated the tempo.
He lost the first set in a tie-break,
and in my opinion he played better.
And I am sure that Đoković and
his team will say that it is not true.
But I think Roger did everything
he needed to and could do
to win that set, but he didn't.
The sets he won, he won easily,
and the ones he lost,
he was almost equal
to his opponent.
You can lose one set like that,
but to lose three sets like that
is something that rarely happens.
And when it comes to match
points, even today people ask me:
"Why didn't he play the service net,
why didn't he hit two first serves..."
Because it shouldn't have.
He came to the match ball in a
certain way, so why change it?
There was another situation
that is rarely talked about,
and that's after he had those
match points and lost his serve,
he had break points again.
I regret that one break ball.
Because he had
one passing shot,
a forehand, because,
I absolutely remember
every detail that we talked about,
that we were preparing
and I told him that in such situations,
Novak will cover the diagonal in principle.
So in such situations,
it should be played in parallel.
He played diagonally,
Novak covered the diagonal,
played one volley,
although it was an awkward ball,
then it fell on the line,
and he lobbed it.
Novak played a smash and
was served again for the match.
I don't know what would
happen, maybe Novak
would get a break again
and nothing would happen again.
but I personally regret that point much
more than those two match points,
he tried to score and missed,
then came to the net,
and Novak scored.
-That was a decisive moment.
One more thing I regret.
I talked about that.
Match before that one.
Match against Nadal 2019
was the biggest match
in my coaching career.
Because it's a match, at least
I have that feeling,
I don't know if it's true,
you can ask Roger about that
when you have the chance,
I think I maybe contributed the most
to the result of that semi-finals match
Wimbledon against Nadal.
But everyone talks about the final,
which was the way it was,
and nobody remembers
that semi-finals.
Ljubo, in addition to the academy,
you accepted another job. -I'm bored.
You are currently in an executive
position in the French Tennis Federation.
You were given a free hands
to organize the entire system.
We all know what France means,
in sports in general, as well as in tennis.
It is an organized system,
healthy, expensive.
How did this
collaboration come about,
this offer, and how do you
see yourself in it?
Let me just say that my
official title is Director...
Developments? -High performance,
actually of everything
that is the competitive part.
How did it come about?
It happened in London at the Laver Cup,
where Roger ended his career.
There he was the president
of the French federation,
whom I knew from before.
He was the director
of the tournament in Lyon,
which I won in 2001.
Everything worked out.
So Gilles Moretton asked
me what I was planning now.
I said I don't know.
I didn't want to train a player again,
although I had interesting offers.
I didn't feel like going
back to coaching.
Then he asked me if I was interested
in helping French tennis.
That seemed very exotic to me,
because we know that
the French are very closed,
they don't let anyone in.
The French tennis federation is
the largest federation in the world.
There are 1 100 000 licensed players.
1 100 000? -Yes, with licenses.
Not recreationists, but competitors.
So it's one huge
piece of machinery.
He invited me to Paris in November,
in Bersa to get to know everything,
because it's a huge structure,
and I really didn't know how it works.
So from the beginning of 2023
I tried to understand how things work.
I followed some players
individually until September,
and since then I officially
became the director of that,
so to speak, competitive part.
Next year is the Olympic year,
I am responsible for all national
teams and Olympic teams.
Of course, the Olympics
in  Paris is a huge pressure.
You don't even have time to list
everything? -Yes, there is a lot.
Honestly, it's hard to finish
everything well.
I would like to be in several
places at the same time.
However, I still can't do it,
but I'm working on it.
It would be good if it was possible.
I'm interested, because
a lot of people say it can be done.
Some people think
that I shouldn't be there.
I don't react to negative energy,
but to when they say it's impossible,
then I react to it.
When they say that there is no chance,
I'll show they that it can.
Are there any potential Federer,
Đoković among those French?
It's a wide base, is there anyone...
-There are many talents.
My official position is 15+,
but I follow what's happening
below that as well.
You have many kids playing tennis,
a tennis culture, that machinery...
Of course, every generation
has a potential great player.
However, something is happening
to them from the age of 15.
I am now responsible for them,
we need to find out what is happening.
Ljubo, it is inevitable, we must
talk about Novak Đoković,
since this show will be watched
in our region, in ex-yu states.
He is the undisputed king here.
You, maybe you have
the complete picture.
You played with him, beat him
and coached his biggest rival.
I know you will be subjective
because of Federer,
but explain to me this phenomenon,
his functioning of reason.
Not all those grand slams, titles,
but what drives him forward?
What is he made of? -Actually,
everyone asks me about Roger.
When I am asked about Đoković,
usually they ask about his record.
Is it the biggest record?
So the fun is over.
However, what few people know
is that Novak and me are friends.
We trained together. When
Novak was 17-18 years old,
he came to Ricardo P., that was
in 2005, when I was at my peak.
We trained together for a while.
I was his mentor.
He still mentions today how
I advised him which wires to use.
So, it often happens that the media
try to provoke us into arguing.
They want to put some
words in my mouth.
However, Novak and I
know each other very well.
We went through some
things together.
Our family members
are also close-knit.
I will return to the question...
Novak is an indestructible tank.
When he sets a goal, he tries to
achieve it. There is no stopping.
As long as he has a goal,
he goes towards it.
At a few moments in his career,
when his goal was not clear,
or there was none, he lost himself,
but as soon as his aim was returned,
then he is infallible.
Is there still fire in him,
because he is a sportsman
who operates that way,
feeding off negative energy.
We can often see him arguing,
how he is provoking the audience,
because he needs that
to move and lift him up.
It's absolutely fascinating to me,
when you watch his videos today,
and 10-15 years ago, the way
he moves, there is no difference.
Of course, it is better now,
it wasn’t better 10-15 years ago.
When you watch the video of Nadal
and Ferrer, 10 years ago,
you will see the difference.
So, he has succeeded
in everything he does.
His body is perfect,
even at 30 and more. I don’t know...
But that is irrelevant because
he is not physically that age.
He will play and win as long
the goal is in the frist place.
At the moment when there is no
target, or if he is in the wrong place,
then its results will be bad,
but the body is absolutely perfect.
I totally get it,
thanks for the answer.
Do you think there is similar
potential in our region?
This doesn’t exist in the world,
such unique potential.
That's my opinion. A tennis
player will never be born again
who will win 20 Grand Slams.
That's how we talked about Stefan
Egberg? About Pete Sampras?
Yes, that was also wrong.
Maybe I'm wrong too.
Time will tell, but in the region...
There is always talent.
I don't want us to take Đoković
as an example, that's impossible.
Maybe I expressed myself
badly, but is there anyone...?
There are always talents.
The difference between our region
and France is that in France,
each generation has many talents.
In our region,
fewer children play tennis
and every 3-4 generations
have one talent.
In Croatia it is Dino Prižmić,
in Serbia it is Medjedović...
There are, they appear,
but not very intensively,
as in some countries,
such as France.
Does your approach with infrastructure
and youth bring a better future?
Or do you think there will be
some kind of stagnation?
Infrastructure doesn’t make champions,
at least we from the region know that.
Conditions don’t make champions,
but mentality and way of thinking.
If you manage to instill this in
athletes and with good conditions,
then there will be an explosion
of excellent results. I don't know...
The fact is that I am not preparing
the Academy for the region.
I work for world tennis and I actually
have few tennis players from the region.
Tennis is an individual sport.
This is what I am trying
to explain to the French.
We, as an association,
can’t guaranteee.
Our role isn’t to create champions,
but we guide and connect them
with quality people.
They must take responsibility
for that project.
In individual sports, the athlete
must take responsibility.
And he is the only one in charge
and responsible for success.
It is clear that there are people
who will help him.
But, if we think that this gym,
the Academy or some association
will make him a tennis player,
that is not possible.
That must be clear to everyone.
We are here to help,
not to work for someone else.
Siener, Rune, Alcraz,
can that "hype" be made again?
Like Đoković, Nadal, Federer
that they can reach those 15, 20?
Are they the new leadership
in the world of tennis? -Yes.
I think that the three of them
are a new generation of tennis.
Who will win Grand Slams?
I don't know how many they will win.
I mention again
what they have won so far.
But Siener, Alcaraz, or
Alcaraz, Siener, then Rune...
We can't put them in
the same sentence.
What those two are doing
is incomparable with Rune.
At the moment,
they are young and phenomenal.
We have this contrast of tennis,
character, personality,
which has nothing to do with each
other. They are highly respected.
And we have the same respect
that Nadal and Feder had.
Alcaz and Siener trained together
this winter. -Is that strange?
It is a wonderful positive message
about what sport is.
I'm also interested
to see what happens.
These three leave, in fact,
one has already done it.
They are phenomenal ambassadors
of our sport, Alcaraz, Siener and Rune.
You said that you participated in
the increase of prize funds in tennis?
Is there a rule, because there is
progress in all sports,
which would you like to change?
You mean the sports rules? -Yes.
As far as tennis is concerned,
we are way ahead.
We have introduced
electronic calling lines...
In the 80s, there was that Cyclops,
if you remember, at Wimbledon...
When you touch it... -Yes.
That was in the 80s.
Well, then Hawkeye...
So we are way ahead.
-Everything is transparent with you.
I will be free to say that tennis
is the fairest sport.
You don't have to have a coach
who will put you in the game
or he doesn't want to.
It's all up to you.
The player has absolute responsibility
for everything that happens to him.
He chooses the coach,
the tournaments he will play.
A mark is left on the ground
if the ball falls.
Of course, children who grow up
in France don’t have
the same conditions as children
who grow up somewhere
where there aren’t tennis
courts or balls.
But, if you manage to overcome
the initial conditions,
it’s the fairest possible sport,
and the second most popular sport
in the world, after football.
It can still be put to much better use,
but as far as sports rules go,
I'm a traditionalist.
I love tradition and I wouldn't
change anything, absolutely.
Maybe let, but that's little.
-I'm hearing that for the first time.
So, everything is okay for you?
Ljubo, now a family question.
Zara and Leonardo, your children,
do they play sports? -Yes.
Unfortunately, Leonardo plays
tennis. -I hope you aren’t his coach?
Absolutely no, I avoid it.
They go to school, in Monaco.
Everything is in the best possible
order. They speak five languages.
I am very proud and happy. Leonardo
loves tennis and enjoys playing it.
He is taller than me, and he is 15.
He had a back problem last year.
He is growing, but he will play tennis,
at what level, time will tell.
He comes here often, to the Academy.
Zara also plays tennis, but less so.
She is not very active,
once or twice a week.
They play sports,
everything is as it should be.
We often talk about my childhood
and theirs, about these differences.
I am proud to be able to give them
the childhood they have.
Afterwards, they wil build
their own lives.
We know you work for Sky Italia?
You are sometimes in my position.
We are colleagues in business,
so tell me how you feel on this side,
when is tennis commented?
-I like that part of the job very much.
I remember that I was very nervous
when I interviewed Rodger
for the first time,
more than 10 years ago.
Then, you understand me? -Yes.
Interview preparation, questions...
I called his manager to ask him
what I could ask him.
He told me that Roger told him,
"I could ask him what I wanted".
Then it creates additional pressure.
Now I sometimes do interviews.
I interviewed Tsitsipas
and Naratilova, last year.
That was fun. I interviewed
Marina Navratilova.
And she says I do it very well.
So, I do have the talent,
but I don't have the time.
But, when I work for the Italian Sky,
I basically work from the studio.
Preparation of the match,
analysis after the match..
Sometimes I comment on the match.
I love it, and I like the way
the Italians do it, with humor.
I like that very much.
Ljubo, finally, the last question...
There have been so many
failures throughout my,
your and everyone's career...
Now you are a coach
and you work with young people.
What kind of approach
do you have
when you are explaining
to them how to behave?
With defeat and rising, after a fall,
how to make two, three, five steps,
every day, and what is the final
message in this show?
How to move forward?
-Work, just work.
No matter how much knowledge
we have, nothing can replace work.
It is the absolute
base for everything.
And you have to be persistent, because
the one who is the most precise
and the best doesn’t succeed, but
the one who is the most persistent,
manages to fall and rise again.
In sports, as in life, there is
no limited number of attempts.
At the end of your career,
nobody mentions you,
except for this show of yours.
But, they ask what you won and
what are your career successes.
All this that we talked about
is necessary for success.
There isn’t a single person
or athlete who tried everything
and knew everything
from the beginning.
No one had everything go smoothly
from the very beginning, from day one.
If something doesn't work today,
try again 200-300 times.
Don't give up, because you
never know where that key is.
I really think, the most persistent
ones succeed in the end,
and those who manage
to rise after falling.
Ljubo, I am speechless.
Thank you!